% Assignment 2: Question 1
% Arman Bilge (`abil933`\; 8079403)
% 2015-04-30

a)  The quicksort implementation we discussed in the lecture is not pure quicksort;
    for small partitions it delegated sorting to insertion sort. The assignment
    implementation, however, is pure quicksort. While the lecture implementation
    uses the "median of three" formula to choose the pivot, the assignment implementation
    uses a formula to compute the pivot that does not consider any of the array values.
    Finally, there are several error-checking mechanisms in place in the assignment
    implementation that are not present in the lecture implementation.

b)  The quicksort implementation provided using `p_index1()` performs poorly on an
    almost-sorted array because the choice of pivot is a poor approximation of
    the median of the data. For a sorted array the median will always be the
    middle index. However, `p_index1()` returns a pivot that is skewed to be near
    to the left index.

c)
    I took advantage of the fact that the input is almost-sorted by choosing the pivot to be the middle index of a partition.[^1]
    Not surprisingly, my `p_index2()` implementation improved performance by an order of magnitude.
    There was only one (potentially pathological) case where performance decreased.

    ```java
    private static int p_index2(int left, int right) {
      return left+(right-left)/2;
    }
    ```

    ```
    1000000 integers read
    #     n       heap        quick1     quick2   speedup
       31250    0.011651    0.022261   0.002206     10.1
       62500    0.012810    0.009587   0.015335     0.6
      125000    0.016694    0.022239   0.001930     11.5
      250000    0.035405    0.047143   0.003935     12.0
      500000    0.072700    0.098572   0.008000     12.3
     1000000    0.065053    0.201438   0.016456     12.2
    ```

[^1]: Please note that I have corrected a bug that I discussed with Prof Brownlee.